[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome to "Thrive,
Self-healing with Ayurveda."
Namaste.
My name is Justine Lemos.
I hold a PhD in
cultural anthropology,
and I'm an Ayurvedic
practitioner.
Ayurveda is the science of life.
It is a system of
medicine and wellness
that originates
in ancient India.
In Ayurveda, we have
three primary energy
and constitutional
types called doshas.
These are vata,
pitta, and kapha.
In this video, I'm
going to be teaching you
how to make Ayurvedic
churnas, or spice mixtures.
These spice mixtures can be used
to create balance in the body
and can be used to
strengthen our digestion.
Strong digestion is
a key to good health,
according to the
system of Ayurveda.
All you need to make your
own fresh spice mixtures
is a clean coffee grinder
and the freshest ingredients
you can find.
Now, the first churna that
we'll make is tri-doshic.
It's good for everyone.
It can be used to
stimulate digestion
and to create balance
in the physiology.
In this spice mixture, we'll
use six parts of fennel seed.
We'll use two parts
of coriander seed.
We'll use two parts of cumin
seed, and one part of turmeric.
Now, a fennel seed is one of
my first go-tos for anyone
who's experiencing digestive
gas, pain, or bloating.
It's known as the
grounded soother.
It promotes healing flow in our
lower chakras of 1, 2, and 3,
and it's very soothing.
Coriander is the same-- it
comes from the same plant
as cilantro, though
you wouldn't know it.
It has a very different
flavor and texture.
And coriander is very
good for all three doshas.
Really, it's good for everyone.
it pacifies all the doshas.
Cumin is known as the
hot kidney cleanser.
It really helps to scrape
ama, or undigested gunk
from our intestinal walls.
In its heating properties,
it reduces metabolic waste
and gunk in the kidneys.
Turmeric has been cultivated
for at least 3,000 years.
It detoxifies the blood and
promotes a healing flow.
So to create a basic
churna, I'm going
to just simply put six
parts of fennel seed
into a coffee grinder.
Or you can also use a more
traditional mortar and pestle.
What I find is that
using a coffee grinder
really mixes the spices
well and releases
a lot of their pungency.
Now, when I cook with
these spice mixtures,
I can place them into oil to
allow their flavor and aroma
to really expand.
I can also just use
the spice mixture
sprinkled on food
to create a healing
meal from really anything.
If I go out to eat, I can
just put the spice mixture
in my purse, take it with me
and sprinkle it on my meal.
So I've placed the
ingredients in the grinder,
and now I'm going to grind it.
[GRINDER WHIRRS]
The smell is really delicious.
So this is a basic churna that's
really good for everybody.
To use it in cooking,
I can saute it lightly
with oil or with vegetables.
And I can use churnas,
really, in soups,
in dals, when I make vegetables,
really anything that's savory.
I don't generally put
them into sweet meals.
Now vata dosha is cold and dry.
And if you're experiencing
a vata dosha imbalance,
you might have constipation,
or dry skin, or anxiety,
because vata dosha rules
the nervous system.
So the vata churna
is going to be
a bit more heating than the
last churna that we made.
For this, I'm going to use
fennel, coriander, cumin,
turmeric, ginger, and
hing, or asafoetida.
And you don't have to
worry about taking notes.
Everything is listed in
the PDF with this video.
So to make a vata
churna, I'm going
to use six parts of fennel.
Again, fennel is so soothing and
it really helps our digestion,
so I'm going to use it for both
the basic churna and the vata
churna.
Six parts of fennel,
two parts of coriander.
Remember, coriander is really
good for all the doshas.
And then I'll use
three parts cumin.
Because cumin is heating and
because vata dosha is cold,
we want to allow the physiology
to get a little bit of warmth
through this spice mixture.
Then we'll use one
part of turmeric,
and one part of ginger.
Ginger is really heating.
It's very pungent.
And so for vata dosha,
which is cold and dry,
it's going to warm
up the physiology.
Now, the last spice
that I'm going to use--
and it's actually an
herb-- in this churna
is called hing, or asafoetida.
And this is a very
pungent spice.
It is very heating and it's
very good for constipation,
which is a typical kind
of vata dosha ailment.
A little bit goes a long way.
You can find this spice at
most natural foods stores
or at Indian groceries.
It's got a very
strong smell to it.
So again, I just put them
all in a coffee grinder
or in a mortar and
pestle, and then I'm
going to grind them up.
[GRINDER WHIRRS]
So this has a more heating,
more pungent smell to it.
And you can see the color is
slightly different in this vata
dosha churna.
The next thing I'm going to do
is make a pitta dosha churna.
Now, pitta dosha is responsible
for the flames, the fires
of the body, so our
transformation, our digestion,
our metabolism.
And if you're experiencing
a pitta dosha imbalance,
you might be afflicted
with early morning wakings,
night sweats,
irritability, rashes.
Or you might just have a
more fiery, concentrated,
constitution, very direct,
very intense, very focused.
So to make a
pitta-taming churna,
I want to use more
cooling ingredients.
So again, here I'm
going to use the funnel.
And I'm going to use even more
fennel, 10 parts of fennel,
because fennel is
cooling, and fennel
is soothing to the
intensity of pitta dosha.
So 10 parts of fennel,
four parts of coriander,
because again,
coriander is cooling.
You'll see in our
video on chutneys
that we used cilantro in
the pitta chutney, which
is also very cooling.
And again, coriander
and cilantro
are the same plant,
from the same plant.
I'll use just two parts of cumin
to give a little bit of heat
to help with digestion
and detoxification.
And then one part of turmeric.
Sometimes we also include
mint, which is very cooling,
in a pitta chutney.
[GRINDER WHIRRS]
So for a pitta dosha
churna, we could also
add something like mint,
either fresh or dried,
to give it even more
of a cooling property.
So this pitta dosha
churna, it has
a more cool kind of flavor
to it, or cool kind of scent
to it.
It just really smells
absolutely delicious.
Now, the last churna that
I'll show you how to make
is for kapha dosha.
And kapha dosha is
like earth and water.
It's slow, it's
cold, it's heavy.
And someone who is having
an imbalance of kapha dosha
might experience water
retention, weight retention,
or heaviness in
their body, swelling.
So this churna is going to
have more spice, more pungency,
in order to get anything
that's stuck moving.
So this is a heating kind
of churna or spice mixture.
So for this spice
mixture, again I'm
going to use the
six parts of fennel,
because fennel is really
your friend when it comes
to digestion, and
these spice mixtures
are primarily for maximizing
and strengthening our digestion.
Six parts of fennel, three
parts of coriander here.
One, two, and three.
And then I'm going to use
three parts of cumin, which
has a more heeding effect.
And then one part of turmeric,
which has a detoxifying effect.
It's also very good for
inflammation in the body.
One part of ginger.
This has a very pungent,
digestive stimulating effect.
Then a half part of cinnamon.
And really, these parts
can be whatever you like.
You can use a half
teaspoon, a full teaspoon.
You can make a whole
lot of spice mixture.
You can put it in
a jar and put it
on your shelf for
about a month and just
have it ready to
use in your cooking.
And then a half part of cloves.
The clove has a
very drying effect,
and that's very good
for kapha dosha, which
tends to be watery, very heavy,
and needs that drying effect
of the clove.
And then just a
quarter part of pepper
to really give it some spice.
So same thing.
I just put it in a
clean coffee grinder.
You want to use a coffee
grinder that has never
been used for coffee, because
once you grind coffee in it,
you won't get the smell out.
So a clean, fresh coffee
grinder that you just
reserve for your spice
mixtures is best.
Or you can use a
mortar and pestle.
I really like to use a coffee
grinder because it is easy
and I really get a good
consistency of the spices.
[GRINDER WHIRRS]
And this is going to have a more
spicy, pungent kind of scent
to it.
When I smell it, it really
starts to make me get hungry.
It's really nice.
Now, you can make
these spice mixtures
and you can keep them in jars.
You can put them in your purse,
take them to a restaurant.
You can also use
them in your cooking.
I cook them in everything
that is savory,
so soups, vegetables, dals.
You'll place them in a saute
pan with a little bit of oil
and just heat them
enough until you
smell the smell of the
spices kind of come alive
or flower and blossom.
And that's when they're ready.
And then you can put in whatever
else you're cooking with them.
Another way you can use them
is, if you have a family that
has different constitutions
or different imbalances,
is you can use them
as a condiment.
Just sprinkle it
on a single meal
that you make for everyone.
So be sure to check out our
other two cooking videos.
And when you put
them together, you'll
have a complete Ayurvedic meal.
Don't forget to explore
the rest of this series
by watching our docuseries,
yoga practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]